UCB-CS162 PintOS实验总结

proj1-userprog:
	这部分主要实现了进程控制系统调用和基础的文件操作系统调用, 包括process_exit(终止当前进程), process_exec(创建子进程并加载指定程序), 
process_wait(等待子进程退出), file_open, close, read, write等. 
	为了同步加载子进程程序时父子进程的行为(父进程等待子进程程序加载完毕, 子进程等待父进程将其加到子进程列表)我使用了loadList链表来保
存正在加载中的进程, 其结点类型loadNode中有两个信号量用来实现同步. 每个pcb中有一个childList, 维护着子进程信息, 包括pid, pcb, 退出状态, 以及
process_wait时使用的信号量. 对于用户进程文件操作, 我在pcb中使用了一个fd_table数组维护打开的文件, 使用file descriptor作为下标进行随机访问, 提
高了效率, 但同时用户进程可打开的文件被限定为了128. 进程退出时关闭所有打开的文件并销毁自己的childList, 将未退出的子进程的parent_pcb置为NULL.
	该部分使我对进程管理有了更深刻的认识, 知道了进程创建的过程, 父子进程之间的管理, 以及进程退出的过程, 同时对文件操作有了基本概念, 了解
了用户进程的文件管理, 并对编写和调试内核代码有了初步认识.

proj2-threads:
	这部分主要实现了有优先级传递机制(A等待B时, 若A优先级大于B, 将B的优先级暂时提升至与A相同)的strict priority调度策略和用户级线程与同步
机制的系统调用, 类似于Linux中的pthread库, 包括pthread_create, exit, join, 以及信号量, 互斥锁的系统调用.
	对于优先级调度的实现, 一开始想用优先队列, 但由于还要实现优先级传递, 队列中的线程优先级可能会被修改, 而优先队列实现修改比较麻烦, 且线
程较多, 用顺序存储易造成空间浪费, 所以就用了list. 对于优先级传递的实现, 我在tcb中加入了waiting_lock和lock_list分别存储正在等待的锁和已持有的锁, 当
申请锁时使用循环将优先级一级一级递归地传递给waiting_lock的持有者. 释放锁时在lock_list中找出最大优先级来更新优先级. 对于pthread库的实现, 在pcb
中添加thread_list, lock_list, sema_list, 用pthreadNode维护用户线程, 保存其join, exit信息, 创建一个用户线程需为其分配中断栈帧然后创建内核线程, 并为其
设置单独的栈指针, 已实现一对一模型. main线程退出时join该进程所有其他线程. 进程退出时将所有线程退出.
	该部分使我对线程管理有了更深刻的认识, 对线程调度, 线程模型, 以及同步机制有了更好的了解, 并进一步加深了对内核代码的理解.

proj3-filesys:
	这部分主要实现了文件读写cache, 可扩展文件, 目录树, 对pintos的文件系统进行了完善与优化.
	对于cache的替换算法, 我采用的是增强的clock算法(enhanced clock algorithm), 使用访问位与修改位作为选择标准, 第一轮扫描找这两位是00
(前一个0表示未访问, 后一个0表示未修改, 下同)的, 如果未找到再扫描一轮找01, 同时将扫描到的访问位置0, 如果还未找到再重复以上扫描. 这种算法的优点
是考虑到了最近被访问和被修改两种情况, 减少整体的替换次数的同时还可以减少写入次数. 对于可扩展文件的实现, 我采用的类似UNIX-FFS的方法, 在inode
块中, 有一个长度为12的存储块号的数组, 用于直接访问块, 大于该数组支持大小的文件将由一个间接访问指针进行索引, 该指针指向一个索引块, 在索引块内
找到要访问的块号, 如果一级索引也不够索引该文件, 剩余部分将由一个二级索引指针进行索引, 该指针指向二级索引块, 该索引块内存储的是一级索引块的块
号, 然后进一步索引. PintOS的地址长度为32, 块大小4KB, 这种方法可支持大约4GB的文件. 目录树部分, 所有对文件的操作都要先打开其所在目录的目录文件, 
这一步需要解析文件路径, 支持绝对路径和相对路径, 每个进程需要保存当前工作目录, 在对文件进行操作后要在目录文件中进行相应修改.
	这部分使我对文件系统有了更深刻的认识, 对目录结构, 缓存, 以及UNIX的inode文件存储有了更好的认识, 也进一步提高了我对内核代码的编写和
调试能力.

	总体来说该实验难度对我来说偏大, 参考了许多github上的代码, 最后还是有一些测试点未通过, 但这次实验使我对操作系统底层有了更深的理解, 
也对内核代码的编写和调试有了一定经验, 还是收益颇丰的.

Summary of UCB-CS162 Pintos lab

Proj1 userprog:
	This section mainly implements process control system calls and basic file operating system calls, including process_exit (terminating the 
current process), process_exec (creating a child process and loading the specified program), process_wait (waiting for the child process to exit), 
file_open, close, read, write, etc.
	In order to synchronize the behavior of the parent and child processes when loading the child process program (the parent process waits 
for the child process program to load, and the child process waits for the parent process to add it to the child process list), I used a loadList linked list.
to save the process being loaded, the node type loadNode has two semaphores to achieve synchronization. Each PCB has a childList that maintains sub 
process information, including PID, PCB, exit status, and semaphores used during process_wait For user process file operations, I used an fd_table array
in PCB to maintain open files and used file descriptors as subscripts for random access, improving efficiency. However, at the same time, the number of 
files that user processes can open is limited to 128. When the process exits, close all open files and destroy its own childList, and set parent_pcb to NULL 
for child processes that have not exited.
	This section has given me a deeper understanding of process management, including the process of process creation, the management bet-
ween parent and child processes, and the process of process exit. At the same time, I have gained a basic understanding of file operations, gained an 
understanding of file management for user processes, and gained a preliminary understanding of writing and debugging kernel code.

Proj2 threads:
	This section mainly implements a strict priority scheduling strategy with a priority donation (when A waits for B, if A's priority is greater 
than B, B's priority is temporarily raised to be the same as A) and system calls for user level threads and synchronization, similar to the pthread 
library in Linux, including pthread_create, exit, join, as well as system calls for semaphores and mutexes
	For the implementation of priority scheduling, I initially wanted to use priority queues, but due to the need to implement priority donation, the 
priority of threads in the queue may be modified. However, implementing priority queues for modification is more cumbersome, and there are many threads, 
so using sequential storage can cause space waste. Therefore, I used a priority_ready_list. For the implementation of priority donation, I added waitinglock and lockunlist in TCB 
to store waiting locks and held locks respectively. When requiring for a lock, I used a loop to recursively pass priority level by level to the holder of waitinglock 
When releasing the lock, find the maximum priority in the lock_list to update the priority For the implementation of the pthread library, add thread_list, lock_list, 
sema_list in the pcb, use the pthreadNode to maintain user threads, save their join and exit information, and create a user thread. To create a user thread, you 
need to allocate interrupt stack frames for it, then create a kernel thread, and set a separate stack pointer for it. A one-to-one model has been implemented. Join 
all other threads of the main thread when it exits. Exit all threads when the process exits
	This section has given me a deeper understanding of thread management, thread scheduling, thread models, and synchronization, and 
further deepened my understanding of kernel code

Proj3 filesys:
	This section mainly implements file read and write cache, extensible files, directory trees, and improves and optimizes the file system of Pintos
	For the replacement algorithm of cache, I use the enhanced clock algorithm, which uses access and modification bits as selection criteria. In the first 
round of scanning, these two bits are found to be 00 (the first 0 represents unreachable and the last 0 represents unmodified, the same below). If not found, 
scan again for 01, and at the same time, set the scaned access bit 0. If not found, repeat the above scanning. The advantage of this algorithm is that it takes 
into account both recently accessed and modified situations, reducing the overall number of replacements while also reducing the number of writes. For the im-
plementation of extensible files, I adopt a UNIX-FS like approach. In the inode block, there is an array of storage block numbers with a length of 12, which is 
used to directly access the block. Files larger than the supported size of the array will be indexed by an indirect access pointer, which points to an index block. 
Within the index block, the block number to be accessed will be found. If the first level index is not enough to index the file, the remaining part will be indexed 
by a second level index pointer, which points to the second level index block. This index block stores the block number of the first level index block, and then fu-
rther indexed. Pintos has an address length of 32 and a block size of 4KB, which can support approximately 4GB of files. In the directory tree section, all operations 
on files must first open the directory file in which they are located. This step requires parsing the file path, supporting absolute and relative paths. Each process needs 
to save the current working directory and make corresponding modifications in the directory file after operating on the file.
	This section has given me a deeper understanding of file systems, directory structures, caching, and UNIX's inode file storage. It has also further improved 
my ability to write and debug kernel code.

	Overall, the difficulty of this experiment was relatively high for me. I referred to a lot of code on GitHub, but in the end, there were still some test points that 
did not pass. However, this experiment gave me a deeper understanding of the underlying operating system, and I also gained some experience in writing and debug-
ging kernel code, which was quite profitable.
